a sit-in vigil at the Minnesota State Capitol over
Thanksgiving Day where we fasted and conducted a
memorial prayer. One of the local peace activists
and clergy and laymen concerned, a Lutheran
minister from Minneapolis came over and we prayed
and the television cameras came and we got good
press. And we were generally trying to do those
less obtrusive things. And we felt like we were
reaching a greater number of people, because they
wanted to sit down and talk with us, because that's
the image we carefully radiated. Well, having
mentioned the election, it's been said that
McGovern was the anti-war candidate and had the
support of the anti-war movement. Does that hold
true with the Vietnam Vets Against the War, at
least in your region? Hubert Humphrey was his main
opponent for the Democratic nomination that
year. Hubert's from the Twin Cities. Hubert's
been a long time strong DFL person. What's a DFL?
Democrat Farmer Labor. The Democratic Party in
this area has been called the Democrat Farmer
Labor for a number of years to indicate its popular
grassroots level support.
A number of veterans felt that in 68, Hubert had
changed his position of supporting the war and
supporting LBJ. That he was forced into
supporting LBJ because he was a vice presidential
candidate, because he was a vice president, and he
believed that the vice president ought to either
be on the president's side or should resign. And so
there was some support for, among the vets, for
Hubert, but I'd say it was probably 5% of the vets
who were active in the political caucuses that
year. Otherwise, 95% of the vets, in my
guesstimation, supported McGovern. And once he
was officially the representative of the
Democratic Party, did the vets engage in campaign
reform?
Yes, yes. The VVAW organization engaged in in
campaigning for him. At this time, on the Mankato
State campus, on the university campus, and also
at a national level, there were two other
veterans' organizations. One had been financed
by the Republicans, and I don't...
Vietnam Veterans for Peace, or Vietnam
Veterans... I don't remember what their title is.
I'd have to look that up. But they had the
three-piece suit, pinstripe person who would go
around and try to heckle us, and do those kind of
things, and come up with facts and figures. They
were basically a reaction by the Republicans. The
Republicans established this group, just like
the Dirty Tricks group the Republicans
established. Like the Hard Hats? Were they Hard
Hats? Yeah. Or I'm saying like the Hardhats. Well,
like the Hardhats, yes. They just went around on
campus and presented themselves to be college
students who agreed with the war.
Plus there was a national organization of just
vets who were attempting to be apolitical.
Did you, by early 73, the BBAW and others sort of
outlined a platform that always seemed to include
a national campaign for the impeachment of Nixon.
Did that play a part at all? Now this is getting
close to when maybe you pulled out or when you left
the VBAW. Well, through the election, through the
election of Carter, I worked with the vets. What
happened in our area is after Carter was elected,
no one Let's see. Wait a second. I'm sorry. I'm
getting confused here. After McGovern was so
badly beaten by Nixon, and after the Watergate
came to a head and Nixon resigned, the
organization basically folded. By that time,
everyone had experienced burnout. The radicals
in the non- veteran peace organizations had began
to take over, and the more moderate folks dropped
out. Okay, so with the withdrawal of Nixon then, is
it just the Minnesota chapter or the five-state
region chapter that folded, or pretty much all
around? Well, the five-state region in Minnesota
folded, and that was the...
the twilight of the national organization. The
urgency which created the organization had
diminished, and the organization basically
folded. Well, after all, in 73, the troops, the
last American troops had already come back, so it
seems to me the major cause, or one of the major
causes, had already been remedied. Okay. Did
you... Through your time either as a member or as
regional director, have any feeling that there
might be some FBI infiltration with what was going
on? Yes, on a number of occasions.
I
believe the first time that I personally
suspected someone that I was associating with to
be to be a plant of some sort was after a meeting of
the Mankato area peace organizations over at my
apartment in Mankato. We met early one evening and
kind of partied on into toward midnight that
night. Got up the next morning and attended
classes. I came home about noon the next day and
found my back door open. Apparently someone who
had been at that meeting had unbolted, it was just a
deadbolt, had unbolted the door which was
positioned behind the refrigerator in the
kitchen. We never used the door and it was just an
emergency exit to us. They'd unbolted the door and
came back that morning knowing I would be at class.
because the refrigerator was slightly ajar and
the door was unbolted. The refrigerator had been
moved about four inches out of place, and I
thought, geez, when did this happen? And I got
nosing around, didn't think too much of it, moved
the refrigerator back into place, and then I
noticed that eight to 10, 12 glasses that we'd been
drinking from the evening before were missing,
and that a ceramic ashtray which I had just
purchased two or three days earlier in
anticipation of smoking at this meeting, was
missing. And we talked about that with some of the
other folks in the organization. We decided that
because about a month, three weeks prior to this
meeting, the regional law enforcement center,
which was being built in Mankato, had been bombed
one evening. And I guess $120,000 damage
somewhere in that area was done. And the clock that
was supposedly used to time the blast had been the
clock that had the Secretary of the Student Senate
from Mankato State. It was her clock on her desk.
She was the first cousin of my wife. And I had spent a
lot of time up at the Student Senate, and I had, upon
coming back from Vietnam, I had applied for
unemployment benefits, and one of the skills that
I'd listed was as a demolition expert. And we began
to put two and two together, and thought that, you
know, unbeknownst to me, I had become a suspect,
and that they were looking for fingerprints of the
people that were at the meeting. Another occasion
was when this person that I suspected to be the
agent, first time I ever laid eyes on him was St.
Patty's Day of that year, when there were two
campuses. There was an upper campus, which was the
newer emerging developing campus at Mankato
State, with the lower campus of Old Main and some
other buildings. There was a bus shuttle system
which shuttled students regularly up and down the
hill. But hitchhiking was by far the prevalent
means of transportation. And hitchhikers
generally waited in a certain area to go between
campuses. And as cars would stop, you'd jump in.
And if there was room, you got in. And you waited
till the next one if it was filled. And this guy hops
into my van, this person that I later suspected.
And he says, St. Paddy's Day. He said, I'm going to
go down to Kilkenny, Minnesota, which is where I'm
from. I'm going to go down to Kilkenny, Minnesota
and have a few beers. That's St. Paddy's Day. I'm
looking for some folks. I'm wondering if
anybody's going that way. And then this guy, I
bumped shoulders with him pretty regularly
thereafter. And I think he even played
racquetball with him on a number of occasions. But
nothing ever came out of that then? Well, I think he
was the operative. And he eventually worked his
way into a position within the organization. And
everyone kind of didn't know what to think of him.
They didn't want to suspect him of being an agent
and alienate him if it wasn't true. And we didn't
have any hard evidence. And he really wasn't
proposing radical things. It just seemed like he
wanted to gather information And we all thought
that there really wasn't any harm in that. Any
other occasions? Yeah. Another occasion was when
a gal came up to me, a red-haired gal from out east,
and she had on hippie bib overhauls. She said she
was driving, she was going out west to live in a
commune, and her van broke down here in Mankato,
and so she decided to enroll at school. and make
some money and repair the van. And she was just
really impressed by a speech I'd given that
morning over at one of the campuses, or schools,
high schools in the area. And could, you know,
could we talk about it? So we sat down in the Union
and had coffee. And she, you know, indicated that
she would be enormously pleased if I went over to
her house and got to know her a little better. And I
was extremely flattered and caught somewhat off
guard and really thought that she was really
attracted to me. At the end of the conversation,
when I decided not to come over and declined going
with her, was, well, can you put me in touch with any
Communist Party members here? I'm really into
this and I want to do my thing on a serious level. And
of course, that was the first opportunity that I'd
had to really think that there were legitimate
card-carrying commies around.
That summer, this was in the spring of 72, that
summer, I attended a summer session at Harvard. I
happened to be sitting in a Zum Zum's coffee ice
cream sandwich parlor, about a half of a block off
of Harvard Square, and I saw her come in and
purchase an ice cream cone, and she had on an
expensive tweed, very British, English,
Harvard, Bostonian, well-to-do suit, and she was
doing something at Harvard. I was going to
approach her and say, hey, how are you doing, and I
thought, God, if it just appears that she was into
something and I don't know who she was, maybe they
don't know I'm here. I don't want to cause any
trouble. Speaking of communists, some suggest
that there was a pro-communist, pro-North
Vietnam element in the anti-war movement. Yes. In
the Minnesota region, that was clearly not true.
We were populists who believed in the
Constitution and in the democratic process. And
we wanted to engage in debates and talk to people
and inform them of our opinion so they could make
their decisions. because we felt the government
and the military were not giving all the data. On
the national level, the VVAW members were
infinitely more radical than we were. We withdrew
because of that. They used the bourgeois
proletariat lingo and jargon. They were
extremely radical in appearance with the afros,
white guys with the afros and beards. grubby,
smelly clothes and spouting slogans instead of
engaging in discourse.
We withdrew, and I think John Kerry ultimately got
out of the organization because we felt that it had
been taken over by people who did not represent
what we wanted represented, that they were
radical. It was very possible that inside their
heads they thought they identified with certain
aspects socialist or communist party. I don't
know that that was the case nationally. Some go so
far as to say that these communist elements were
actually being directed from Moscow.
I don't know. We suspected that one of the radical
people on the national board of VVAW was actually
an FBI plant. And he would occasionally propose
things that I thought were outlandishly radical
and would ultimately be extremely detrimental to
the peace movement. And the rest of the folks
there, a great number of others, didn't seem to
have jobs, but yet seemed to be able to fly around
the country and live a live a lifestyle. I don't
know. I don't know. I've thought about that many
times after that meeting in Kansas City, but I've
never had any hardcore evidence. Okay. Well,
along with this pro-communist element, Norman
Podhoretz cites two other themes or elements
comprising the BBAW as well as just anti-war
movements in general. And one is the
anti-anti-communist attitude. Was that
prevalent with your group? That is the attitude
that rejects the monolithic communist and is anti
the better dead than red attitude.
Um... There were certain people in the local
region who believed that, or who felt that it may
not necessarily be better to be dead than red.
Maybe I didn't make that clear enough. The
anti-anti-communists, didn't most of you share
that attitude, that over detente spirit,
rejecting the notion that communism is the world
menace? And that suggests in itself that that
attitude may have been one of the reasons for
getting into NOM in the first place. I think that
the prevalent attitude was that communism was not
so monolithic, and that communism was,
but yet communism was generally evil. of some
nature. But on the other hand, if in a free
democratic election people chose to do things
that were more philosophically communist, that
was their business. If those folks in other
countries wanted to live that way, that really was
their business. Okay. And the third gang was an
anti-American, or sometimes called
anti-imperialist, at least in their terms,
aspect. Did you find that in your region? Not in the
region. There were occasional people who talked
that way.
But at the national level? At the national level,
that was probably the prevalent attitude.
Really? was the terms that they could speak out
most on. How strongly they identify with any other
political organization such as the Commies, I
don't know. But anti-imperialism was a big, big
issue. And when that issue was growing, that's
when you all withdrew then. About that same time?
Yeah. The anti-imperialist issue had been around
for quite a while, and we basically agreed with
them that we ought not to be imperialist. It was
just a matter of, is it imperialist to go in and
preserve a democracy? Well, if you read the VBAW
today, or let's say 1982, they now... went ahead to
attach the anti-imperialist slogan at the end,
it's no longer the VBAW, but it's the VBAWAI, that
would tend to suggest that most of the
conservative elements, indeed when you read the
paper, most of the conservative elements are no
longer there. It's more of an anti-imperialist,
any U.S. action seems to be viewed as an
imperialist gesture now. Seems a little bit more
like the radicals took over now? Yeah, I think very
clearly they have. most other people after the
withdrawal of American troops that for whatever
reasons I've got to get my own personal life in
order. I've got to graduate from college or get my
job or get back in the swing and start to lead a
normal life. There are very few people who
continued on in a political vein of this sort
outside of the major parties. Most of us were
assimilated into attending caucuses and voting
and involving ourselves in some political
organization. But for about six, eight years, I
heard or read nothing or had no contact with any
organization of VBAW. And this latest
resurfacing, I really don't know what they stand
for. Well, in 1982, they were in direct opposition
to the building of the memorial that was put up in
Washington, saying that what that was was a slap in
the face to the anti-war movement and a
preparation to get some more 18-year-old boys
ready to go for some imperialistic cause or
intentions in Central America or wherever. and
therefore they were rejecting that on the basis of
an anti-imperialist pitch. Well, you know, I
would add they're by far an extremely small
minority. I think most, the greatest percentage
of vets were thought monuments of some positive
notoriety were due. To pull almost a quote out of
their 1982 issue, they say the true forgotten
heroes were actually the VC, where they taught the
anti-war movement how to rebel against the
imperialists who forced them to crawl and march
forward. Well, I think that's a lot of horse shit,
and you can quote me on that.
The VC slaughtered so many people, the bloodbath
that we wanted to prevent occurring. We were
protesting against the war, which we believed was
coming once we withdrew. It did come, but I don't
think anyone realized the extent of it. The
killing fields kind of mentality that existed in
Laos and Cambodia, as well as Vietnam, it's hard to
compliment the VCs. on their contributions to
humanity when the greatest thing they've done is
kill each other since we've left the country and
kill their neighboring Cambodians. I certainly
wouldn't compliment the VC on standing up. This
country's had a 200-year reputation for standing
up.
Just reflects perhaps the radical nature. I think
it reflects the extremely radical nature. Okay.
One more, I guess, local question, and that is in
dealing in Mankato or the Twin Cities, did you have
any problems with the mayor, like Stenvig in
Minneapolis, or were most people pretty
cooperative as far as getting a permit to march or
things thereof?
Had too much problem. Of course, you're not going
to put that in. No. We never had too much problem in
Mankato, and I really don't think that we had a
whole lot of problem in Minneapolis-St. Paul. We
always policed ourselves up and were dedicated,
nonviolent, and people didn't dread to see us
coming because we didn't leave an aftermath. The
Mayor Stenvig in Minneapolis, I don't know, he
didn't do anything in denying VVAW any of the
requests that we submitted to march or to protest
or to meet. He, I believe that he was a little less
considerate of some of the other organizations.
but politically he didn't think it was a good idea
to tangle with the vets group because we really
hadn't done anything bad. In Mankato, the police
chief so identified, was so distraught with the
conduct of the war, and it's continuing, and the
misinformation and disinformation that the
government and the military published that once
he reached that position, he resigned from the Air
Force Reserve, where he'd had an 18-year career at
that point, and had been a Korean War vet. And he
lost his pension and other rights on account of it,
but he so firmly identified. He also, we at Mankato
did a couple of things. One of them was we conducted
a I think it amounted to about a 62-day vigil at the
post office where we maintained a continuous
presence. And he nor the police or anyone other
than individual citizens hassled us there. The
most violent thing that occurred was the members
of the peace organizations
occupied a bridge between Mankato and North
Mankato, and it was a primary link of travel for
folks coming in between the two cities. Occupied
it for one afternoon, and the highway patrol
eventually, with the sheriff and police, had to
arrest a number of folks. Okay. Now, when did you
leave to wrap up? You left the VVAW, when? Or at
least your position as regional director? Or did
the movement just fold? The movement just folded.
There was no subsequent election of anyone after
that. I think the tape's about to run out too.
About ten minutes. Well, with the folding of the
organization then, how would you view your
accomplishments with what you had intended to do?
Monumental on a level with Lincoln, Jefferson,
Washington, and Christ.
Seriously. I think in this region, we
accomplished what we set out to do. I think we did a
good job. We were persistent. We maintained a
steady image. It was a hard time for Vietnam
veterans. Drugs were coming in. A lot of Vietnam
veterans fell prey to drugs. We managed to keep, to
disassociate drugs and VVAW. We managed to keep
veterans who held jobs and went to school
associated with VVAW. On the national level, I
think they fell prey to drugs and the radical
influences, and it seemed that movements have a
way of going that way. It's been my own personal
experience. You look at almost any movement, the
more radicals take over for a while and the
movement goes downhill. and disintegrates. For
example, currently the women's movement,
they're making much less radical overtures
because they realize they've turned off a number
of people and they're politically not going to
achieve things. We politically added a
credibility to the position that we were not
winning the war, we were not achieving
Vietnamizations, that the statistical body
count analysis was false, was a false premise,
which was supported by McNamara, who
subsequently has proclaimed that he regrets
that, that it was a mistake.
Wes Moreland withdrew his suit, his libel suit
against CBS, clearly indicating that he felt like
he had to go through the motions but knew he
couldn't win. And there was just too much evidence
that at various levels, various people
suppressed information, passed on doctored
information, and the position we took that this
was going on was a true position. And believing in
the democratic process, we wanted to talk this
over and get that information out, and we
accomplished that. Okay. It seems then that
you're pretty favorable about what the Midwest
region did based on this Midwest liberalism,
which you seem to say was best typified by Kerry.
John Kerry? John Kerry from Massachusetts. And
then you have second thoughts, or you withhold
some of that enthusiasm as far as the movement as a
national movement. Yeah. I wouldn't say it was
best typified by John Kerry, because he's an
Easterner and really didn't have his finger on the
pulse of what was happening out here. He was by far
the most articulate spokesman that VVAW had
surface on any national level. And on the national
level, I think that the radical elements
controlled and that I don't know what these people
were up to. And I don't know who supported them. And
I didn't trust them. And if the members here had
gotten the chance to personally meet them and
associate with them, the members here would not
have condoned them and did not. We got home. We
discussed it. That was it. We were disgusted. We
were through with National VVAW. But we continued
our efforts because we weren't sure what had
happened, whether the FBI had caused this radical
group nationally, whether it didn't matter to us
who it was, our point was still the same. Let's
continue the dialogue. It's best for the country.
Right. And with the end of the war, logically the
end of the movement. Yes. Some people have likened
me to a modern-day Christ, and I want to say that I
don't think that's true. Well, then thank you very
much for the interview, and hopefully the FBI
doesn't read this. How many years will it be before
I get the transcript of this one? Well, hopefully
not more than the usual two.
Thank you. Thank
you.